Once upon a time, in a country a long way from here, there stood a
flourishing city, full of commerce; and in that city lived a merchant
so lucky in all his ventures that it seemed as if fortune waited on his
wishes. But while enormously rich, he had a very long family of six
sons and six daughters; and as yet not one of them was settled in life.
The boys were too young to go out in the world; and the girls, who had
everything at home the heart could desire, were in no hurry to risk a
change by choosing a husband, although many rich and noble suitors paid
court to them.

But one day an unexpected disaster brought this pleasant state of
things to an end. Their house caught fire and was burnt to the ground;
and with it perished not only the magnificent furniture, but the
merchant's account books, bank notes, gold and silver, and the precious
wares on which his wealth depended. Scarcely anything was saved.

This was but the beginning of their misfortunes. Their father, who
up to now had prospered in everything he touched, lost in a very
short while every ship he had upon the sea. Some were wrecked, others
captured by pirates. His agents failed; his clerks in foreign countries
proved unfaithful; and, in short, from the height of riches he suddenly
fell into the direst poverty.

Nothing was left to him but one poor little country cottage, at least
a hundred leagues from the city in which he had lived. In this he was
driven to find refuge, and to this he carried off his family, who were
in despair since the overthrow. The daughters especially could not
endure the thought of dwelling in such a den (as they called it). At
first they had felt sure that on hearing the news their suitors would
be tripping one another up in haste to renew their offers of marriage.
But in this they were soon undeceived. Their downfall was no sooner
known than all these flattering wooers took to their heels in a troop.
They fared no better with their intimate friends, who at once dropped
their acquaintance. Nay, those to whom our merchant had formerly shown
the greatest kindness were now the most eager to speak ill of him.

So nothing was left for this hapless family but to take their departure
from the city and shut themselves up in the cottage, which stood in the
depth of a dismal and almost trackless forest. No servants now to wait
on them! The sons tilled the ground and swept out the farm sheds; and
the daughters, dressed like country girls in coarse linen frocks, were
forced to turn their delicate hands to the roughest employment and live
on hard fare of which there was little enough.

Only the youngest daughter showed a brave heart. She had been
despondent as any of them to begin with; but after weeping--as well she
might--for her father's misfortunes, she recovered her natural gaiety,
made the best of things, tried to forget how ungrateful the world had
been, kept her father and her brothers amused with her cheerful wit,
and after she had done her work, would sing and play. But her sisters
would not join with her in making the best of things. 'It is very easy
for you to be happy,' the eldest grumbled. 'You have low tastes and
were born for this kind of life.' The fact is, they were all jealous of
her because of her sweet temper and good looks. So beautiful, indeed,
was this youngest sister that in the old days every one had agreed to
call her _Beauty_--by that and by no other name she was known. Alone of
them she might easily, in the first days of their ruin, have found a
husband; but she could not think of this while she could be of use to
help and console her family.

Two years passed, and there came news which seemed to offer a hope to
escape. One of their father's ships, long supposed to be lost, had
arrived in port with a rich cargo. The message further advised his
return to the city with speed, or his, agents might sell the goods too
cheaply and he would lose his gains. So, whilst his children danced
with joy at the news, the merchant set about preparing for his long
journey.

In their transport his daughters loaded him with commissions for gowns
and jewels it would have taken a fortune to buy. Only _Beauty_ would
not ask for anything. Her father, noting her silence, interrupted the
others who still kept adding to their list of requirements.

'Well, _Beauty_,' he said, 'and what shall I bring home for you? Surely
you, too, wish for something?'

'Dear father,' she answered, 'I wish for the most precious thing in the
world; and that is to see you home again safe and sound.'

This answer covered the sisters with confusion, and vexed them so that
one of them, speaking up for the others, said tartly: 'This small miss
is putting on airs. She thinks, no doubt, she cuts a figure with her
affected fine sentiments!'

Her father, however, was touched by her good feeling. Nevertheless he
told her to choose something--'For,' said he, 'at your age it is only
natural to like dresses and pretty presents.'

'Well, dear father,' said she, 'since you insist, I will beg you to
bring me home a rose. I have not seen one since we came to live here,
and I love roses.' In this way _Beauty_ contrived to obey her father
and yet to put him to no expense.

The day came for the merchant to embrace them all and bid them
farewell. He made the best of his way to the great city; and arrived
there to be met with a great disappointment. To be sure his vessel had
come safely to port; but his partners, believing him dead, had taken
possession of it and divided the cargo between them. To make good his
claim he was forced to bring a number of tedious law-suits. He won them
in the end; but only to find, after six months of trouble and expense,
that he was almost as poor as when he started.

To make his misery complete he was forced to travel back in the winter,
in the most inclement weather; so that by the time he reached the
skirts of the forest he was ready to drop with fatigue. But reminding
himself that his home was now not many leagues away, he called up what
strength, remained to him.

As he pushed on through the forest, night overtook him; and in the
piercing cold, half buried--his horse and he--in the deep snow that hid
every pathway, the poor merchant feared that his last hour had come.
Not so much as a hut did he pass. The only shelter to be found was the
trunk of a hollow tree; and there he cowered through the long night,
kept awake by his hunger and the howling of the wolves. Nor did the
day bring him much comfort: for thick snow lay everywhere, and not a
path was to be seen. It was only after a weary search that he managed
to recover his horse, which had wandered away and partly sheltered
itself in another hollow tree. He mounted, and now in a little while
discovered a sort of track which presently grew easier.

Following this, he found himself in an avenue of trees, at the entrance
of which he halted and rubbed his eyes. For no snow had fallen in this
avenue, and the trees were tall orange-trees, planted in four rows and
covered with flowers and fruit; and here and there among the trees
were statues, some of single figures, others of groups representing
scenes of war, but all coloured like real life. At the end of the
avenue, straight in front of him, rose a magnificent castle in many
terraces. The merchant rode around to the stable courtyard, which
he found empty; and there, with half-frozen hands, he unbridled and
stabled his horse. Within the doorway he found a staircase of agate
with balusters of carved gold. He mounted it and passed through room
after room, each more splendidly furnished than the last. They were
deliciously warm, too, and he began to feel his limbs again. But he
was hungry; where could he find some one to give him food? Everywhere
was silence; and yet the place had no look of being abandoned.
Drawingrooms, bedchambers, galleries--all stood unlocked.... At last,
tired of roaming, he came to a halt in an apartment where some one had
lit a bright fire. A sofa drawn up cosily beside it, invited him to sit
and warm his limbs; and resting there, he closed his eyes and fell into
deep and grateful slumber.

As weariness had sent him to sleep, so hunger awoke him. He opened
his eyes and saw at his elbow a table with meats and wine upon it. He
had been fasting for more than twenty-four hours, and lost no time
in falling-to. He hoped that he might soon have sight of this most
hospitable entertainer, whoever he might be, and an opportunity of
thanking him. Still no one appeared; and now this good food did for him
what fatigue had done before. He dropped off again into an easy slumber
which lasted for four hours almost. Again awaking, he saw at his elbow
another small table--of porphyry this time--upon which the unknown
hands had set out a dainty meal of cakes, crystallised fruits and
liqueurs. To this, too, he did justice. But, as the time still passed
and no one appeared, he began to feel terrified, and resolved to search
once more through all the rooms.... But still he found no one.

[Illustration: He had been fasting, for more than twenty-four hours,
and lost no time in falling to.]

He was standing lost in thought, when of a sudden it came into his
mind that some kindly power had perhaps prepared this palace of wonder
for him, that it with all its riches might indeed be his. Possessed by
this notion he once again made a tour of the rooms and took stock of
their treasures, planning in his mind how he would divide them amongst
his children, assigning this apartment to one and that to another, and
whispering to himself what joy he would carry home after all from his
journey. Then he went down into the garden, where--though it was the
depth of winter--the birds were singing and the air breathed the scent
of a thousand flowers.

'Surely,' he told himself, 'my daughters will be happy here and never
desire any more to go back to the city. Quick! Let me saddle my horse
at once and ride home with the news!'

The way to the stable was an alley fenced on either hand with palings,
and over the palings hung great clusters of roses in bloom. They
reminded him of his promise to _Beauty_. He plucked one, and was about
to pluck a whole nosegay, when he was startled by a horrible noise
behind him, and attempted to turn. But behind him stood a hideous
_Beast_ who was overtaking him and reaching out towards him.

'Who gave you leave to pluck my roses?' roared this monster. 'Was it
not enough that I made you welcome in my palace and treated you kindly?
And you show your gratitude by stealing my flowers! But your insolence
shall not go unpunished!'

The good merchant, terrified no less by the sight of this _Beast_ than
by his threats, let drop the rose and flung himself on his knees.

'My Lord,' he cried, 'have pity on me! I am not ungrateful; but after
all your kindness I could not guess that so small a thing would offend
you.'

This speech did not at all abate the _Beast's_ wrath. 'Hold your
tongue, sir,' he commanded, 'if you can offer me nothing but flatteries
and false titles. I am not "my lord." I am the _Beast_; and your words
will not save you from the death you deserve.'

The merchant, although in fear of his life, plucked up courage to tell
the monster that the rose which he had been bold to pluck was for one
of his daughters, by name _Beauty_. Then, in hope either to delay the
_Beast's_ vengeance or to touch his compassion, he launched into the
tale of all his misfortunes, and of his reasons for the journey, not
forgetting to mention _Beauty_ again and her request.

The _Beast_ considered for a moment before answering him in a somewhat
milder tone: 'I will forgive you; but only on condition that you
give me one of your daughters. _Some one_ must make amends for this
trespass.'

'Heaven forgive me,' the merchant entreated, 'but how can I promise
such a thing! Even were I cruel enough to purchase my life at the cost
of a child, on what excuse could I bring her?'

'No excuse is necessary,' replied the _Beast_ shortly. 'Whichever you
bring must come here of her own free will, or not at all. Go home and
try if there be one brave and loving enough to sacrifice herself to
save your life. You seem to be an honest man. Give me your word to
return here at the end of a month and bring whichever of your daughters
you can persuade to come with you. If you can persuade none of them,
you must come alone; and I warn you that, if you fail of it, I shall
come and fetch you.'

What was the poor man to do? He promised, for he saw death staring him
in the face; and having given his promise he hoped to be allowed to
depart. But the _Beast_ informed him that he could not go until next
day.

'Then,' said he, 'at daybreak you will find a horse ready for you who
will carry you home in less than no time. Now go and eat your supper,
and await my commands.'

The merchant, more dead than alive, crept back to his rooms. There,
before a blazing fire, he found a delicious supper spread, inviting
him to eat. But so distraught was he, that no food, however delicious,
could have tempted him had he not been afraid that the _Beast_ might be
hiding somewhere to watch him. In fear of this he forced himself to sit
and taste of the dishes.

A loud noise in the next room warned him that the _Beast_ was coming.
Since he could not escape, he mustered what courage he could to conceal
his terror, and faced about to the doorway.

'Have you made a good supper?' was the _Beast's_ first question.

The merchant in humblest voice answered that, thanks to his host's kind
attention, he had fared excellently well.

'I am paying you a visit,' said the _Beast_, 'to warn you again to be
honest with your daughter. Describe me to her just as I am. Let her
be free to choose whether she will come or no; but tell her that, her
course once chosen, there can be no retreat, nor even reflection after
you have brought her to me. To break faith then will avail nothing: she
will but destroy you without winning her own release.'

Again the spirit-broken merchant repeated his promise.

The _Beast_ appeared to be content at length. 'Retire to bed now,'
he commanded, 'and do not get up to-morrow until you see the sun
and hear a golden bell rung. Then, before starting, you will find
breakfast laid for you here; your horse will be standing ready saddled
in the courtyard; and you may carry back the rose to your daughter
_Beauty_--as you call her. For the rest, I count on seeing you back in
a month's time. So, farewell.'

The merchant, who dared not disobey a single one of these orders,
retired to bed at once, though without any temptation to sleep; and
again, though he passed a wretched night, he was punctual to rise
with the sun. A golden bell rang; and prompt on the sound he found
breakfast laid, still by unseen hands. After breakfast he went down to
the stables, and on his way paused to pick up the rose, which lay in
the alley where it had dropped from his hand. It was fresh as ever, and
smelt as sweetly as though it yet grew on the tree.

A few paces further on he found his horse standing ready saddled,
with a handsome cloak of furs, far warmer than his own, lying across
the saddle. He put it on and mounted, and now he had to wonder at yet
another miracle. His horse set off at an incredible speed, so that
before he could even turn in the saddle the palace had sunk out of
sight.

Could the horse have felt the weight on the good man's mind, it had
never made such a pace. But it took its own way, insensible to rein or
bridle; nor halted until it reached the door of the cottage.

The merchant's sons and daughters had rushed out at his approach;
though it was not until he drew quite close that they recognised their
father in this horseman superbly cloaked, with a rose at his holster,
and mounted on a horse that travelled at such a speed. When they
recognised him, they made sure that he brought the best of news. But
the tears that trickled down his cheeks as he dismounted told them
another story.

His first motion then was to pluck the fatal rose from the pommel and
hand it to _Beauty_, saying: 'Here is what you asked me to bring. You
little know what it will cost you all.'

This, and his sorrowful look, gave the eldest daughter her cue. 'I was
certain of it!' she said. 'Did I not say, all along, that to force
a rose at this time of the year would cost you more than would have
bought presents for all the rest of us? A rose, in mid-winter! and such
a rose! There--one has only to look at it to see that you took good
care _Beauty_ should have her present, no matter at what cost to us!'

'It is all too true,' answered their father sorrowfully, 'that this
rose has cost me dear--far dearer than all the presents you others
begged of me. But the cost is not in money; for would to God I could
have bought it with the last penny in my purse!'

His speech, you may be sure, excited their curiosity, and they gave
him no rest until he had told the whole of his story. It left their
hopes utterly dashed: and the daughters lamented their lot, while their
brothers hardily declared that they would never allow their father to
return to this accursed castle--they would march thither in a body and
destroy the horrible _Beast_ who owned it. But their father assured
them that he had given his word and would rather die than break it.

Thereat the sisters turned upon _Beauty_ and started to upbraid and
rail against her.

'It is all your fault,' they declared; 'and this is what comes of
your pretended modesty! Why could you not have asked for dresses and
jewels as we did? Even if you could not get them, at least the demand
would have cost nothing. But you chose to be singular--you, with your
precious rose! and now our father must die, and we must all suffer
through your affectation!'

Poor _Beauty_ controlled her tears and answered them: 'Yes, I am to
blame for all this, though, indeed, dear sisters, I did it innocently;
for how could I guess that to ask for a rose in the middle of summer,
as it was then, would give rise to all this misery? But what does that
matter? Innocent or guilty, I cannot allow you to suffer for what was
my fault; and so I will go back with our father to save him from his
promise. That will be in a month's time, and in this little month, I
beg of you, let us be happy together without reproaches.'

At first her brothers would not hear of any such sacrifice, and her
father was equally set against it, until the sisters again fired up
in their jealousy and accused him of being distressed only because it
happened to be _Beauty_; if another of his daughters (they hinted)
had offered to pay this price for his life, he would have accepted it
cheerfully enough!

_Beauty_ closed this talk by saying firmly that, whether they wished
it or not, she would go--'And who knows,' said she, forcing a brave
smile, 'but this fate of mine, which seems so terrible, may cover some
extraordinary and happy fortune?' She said it merely to hearten them;
but her sisters, fancying her deluded by vanity and self-conceit,
smiled maliciously and applauded. So their father gave way, and it was
agreed that _Beauty_ must go. For her part she desired only that the
few days remaining to her might be as happy as possible; and so, as
they passed she spoke little of what was before her, and, if at all,
only to treat it lightly and as a piece of good fortune. When the time
drew near she shared up all her trinkets and little possessions with
her sisters--for, badly as they had treated her, they were the only
friends she had. Yet jealousy had made their hearts so wicked that when
the fatal day arrived they actually rejoiced to hear the neighing of a
horse which, punctually sent by the _Beast_, arrived at the door of the
cottage.

[Illustration: Soon they caught sight of the castle in the distance.]

The brothers would have rushed out and slain the beautiful animal;
but _Beauty_, mastering their anger with a few tender words, bade
her father mount into the saddle; and so, after bidding her sisters
farewell with a tenderness that forced them to weep at the last,
climbed to the pillion behind him quite as if she were setting out
for a holiday. They were off! The horse seemed to fly rather than to
gallop; so smoothly that _Beauty_ could scarcely feel the motion save
by the soft wind that beat on her cheek. Soon they caught sight of the
castle in the distance. Her father, less happy than she, again and
again asked and begged her to alight and return--a most idle offer,
for he had no real control of the reins. But _Beauty_ did not listen,
because her mind was made up.

Nevertheless, she was awed, and all the more when, as the fleet horse
galloped up to the courtyard, they were met by a great salvo of guns
and, as the echoes died away, by the sound of soft music within the
palace.

The horse had come to a stop, by a flight of agate steps; a light shone
down these steps from a porchway within which the violins kept their
throbbing. _Beauty_ slipped down from the saddle, and her father,
alighting after her, took her by the hand and led her to the chamber in
which he had first supped; where, sure enough, they found a cheerful
fire and a score of candles lit and burning with an exquisite perfume,
and--best of all--a table laid with the daintiest of suppers.

The merchant, accustomed to the ways of their host, knew that the
supper was meant for them, and _Beauty_ fell-to with a good appetite.
Her spirits indeed were rising. There had been no sign of any _Beast_
in all the many rooms through which she had passed, and everything in
them had seemed to breathe of gaiety and good living.

But this happy frame of mind did not last long. They had scarcely
finished supper when the _Beast_ was heard coming through the distant
rooms. At the sound--the heavy padding of his feet, the roar of his
breath--_Beauty_ clung to her father in terror, and had almost fainted
against the arm which he flung around her. But when the _Beast_ stood
before her in the doorway, after a little shudder she walked towards
him with a firm step, and, halting at a little distance, saluted him
respectfully. This behaviour evidently pleased the _Beast_. After
letting his eyes rest on her face for a while, he said, in a tone that
might well have struck terror into the boldest heart (and yet it did
not seem to be angry):--

'Good evening, my good sir! Good evening, _Beauty_!'

The merchant was too far terrified to find his voice; but _Beauty_
controlled hers and answered sweetly:--

'Good evening, _Beast_!'

'Have you come here of your own free will?' asked the _Beast_. 'And are
you willing to let your father return and leave you here?'

_Beauty_ answered that she was quite willing.

'Indeed? And yet what do you suppose will happen to you after he has
gone?'

'Sir,' said _Beauty_, 'that is as it pleases you, and you only can
tell.'

'Well answered,' replied the _Beast_; 'and since you have come of
your own accord, you shall stay. As for you, my good sir,' said he to
the merchant, 'you will take your departure at sunrise. The bell will
give you warning; delay not to rise, eat your breakfast, and depart as
before. But remember that you are forbidden ever to come within sight
of my palace again.'

Then, turning to _Beauty_, he said:--

'Take your father into the next room, and choose between you everything
you think will please your brothers and sisters. You will find there
two travelling trunks: fill them as full as they will hold.'

Sorrowful as she was at the certainty of losing her father so soon and
for ever, _Beauty_ made ready to obey the _Beast's_ orders, and he left
them as he had come, saying:--

'Good night, _Beauty_! Good night, good sir!'

When they were alone, _Beauty_ and her father went into the next
room, which proved to be a store-chamber piled with treasures a king
and queen might have envied. After choosing and setting apart in
heaps,--one for each of her sisters,--the most magnificent dresses she
could find, _Beauty_ opened a cupboard which had a door of crystal
framed in gold, and stood for a moment dazzled by the precious stones
that lay piled on every shelf. After choosing a vast number and adding
them to her heaps, she opened yet another wardrobe and found it full of
money in gold pieces. This set her pondering.

'I think, father,' she said, 'that we had better empty these trunks
again, and fill them with money. For money can always be turned to
account, whereas to sell these precious stones you would have to go
to some jeweller, who very likely would cheat you, and perhaps be
suspicious of them. But with these pieces of gold you can buy land,
houses, furniture, jewels--what you will--and no one will ask any
questions.'

Her father agreed. Yet he first of all tried to make room for the money
by emptying out the few things he had packed for himself. But this was
no good: for it seemed that the trunks were made in folds which opened
the wider the more he put in. Somehow the more they packed, the more
room there seemed to be, and they ended by replacing all the dresses
and precious stones they had taken out. But now the trunks were so
heavy that an elephant would have sunk under them.

'It is all a cheat!' cried the merchant. The _Beast_ is mocking us, and
only pretended to give us these things, knowing that I could not carry
them away.'

'Wait a little,' advised _Beauty_. 'That would be a sorry jest, and
I cannot help thinking that the _Beast_ is honest; and that since he
offered these gifts he will find you also the means to carry them. The
best thing we can do is to strap up the trunks and leave them ready
here.'

So they did this and went back to the little room, where to their
amazement they found a breakfast laid on the table. For a moment they
could scarcely believe that the night had flown by whilst they were
occupied in ransacking the treasure chamber and packing the trunks.
But, glancing at the windows, they saw that day was indeed breaking;
and presently a bell sounded, warning the merchant to eat quickly and
depart.

He finished his meal, and they went down together to the courtyard,
where two horses stood ready--the one laden with the two trunks, the
other saddled for the merchant to ride. And now _Beauty_ and her father
would fain have spent a long time in bidding one another farewell. But
the two horses neighed and pawed the ground so impatiently that he was
afraid to linger. Tearing himself from his daughter's arms he mounted
in haste, and could scarcely turn to say good-bye before both horses
sprang away swift as the wind and he was lost to sight in an instant.

Poor _Beauty_! She gazed and gazed through her tears, and so mounted
the stairs sorrowfully back to her own chamber. On reaching it she
felt herself oppressed with sleepiness, for she had passed the night
without undressing, and, moreover, for a month past her sleep had been
broken and haunted with terrors. So, having nothing better to do, she
went to bed, and was nestling down in the perfumed sheets when her eyes
fell on the little table by the bedside. Some one had set a cup of hot
chocolate there, and, half asleep, she reached out her hand for it
and drank it; whereupon her eyes closed and she fell into a delicious
slumber, such as she had not known since the day when her father
brought home the fatal rose.

She dreamed that she was walking alongside an endless canal, the banks
of which were bordered with tall orange-trees and myrtles in flower.
There, as she wandered disconsolately lamenting her fate, of a sudden a
young _Prince_ stood before her. He was handsome as the God of Love in
picture-books, and when he spoke it was with a voice that went straight
to her heart. 'Dear _Beauty_,' he said, 'you are not so unfortunate as
you suppose. It is here you shall find the reward of your goodness,
denied to you elsewhere. Use your wits to find me out under the
disguise which hides me--that is, if as I stand here now you find me
not altogether contemptible. For I love you tenderly--you alone--and in
making me happy you can attain to your own happiness. Beloved, never
distrust your own true heart, and it shall lead you where the heart
has nothing left to desire!' So saying, the charming apparition knelt
at her feet, and again besought her to accept his devotion and become
mistress over all his life.

'Ah! What can I do to make you happy?' she asked earnestly.

'Only be grateful,' he answered, 'and do not believe all that your eyes
would tell you. Above all, do not abandon me until you have rescued me
from the cruel sufferings I endure.'

With that the dream melted away, but only to be succeeded by another.
She found herself face to face with a stately and beautiful lady; and
the lady was speaking to her with dignity, yet most kindly.

'Dear _Beauty_,' she said, 'do not grieve for what you have left
behind; a far higher destiny lies before you. Only, if you would
deserve it, beware of being misled by appearances.'

_Beauty_ found her dreams so agreeable that she was in no hurry at all
to awake, and even when her eyes opened to the daylight she had more
than half a mind to close them again. But a clock, chiming out her own
name twelve times, warned her that it was midday and time to get up.
She rose, therefore, and found her dressing-table set out with brushes
and combs and everything she could want; and having dressed carefully,
and with a lightness of heart for which she found it hard to account,
she passed into the next room and found her dinner on the table.

Dinner does not take very long when you are all by yourself. _Beauty_,
when she had eaten enough, sat down on a sofa and began to think of the
handsome youth she had seen in her dream. 'He told me I could make him
happy. Why, then, it must be that the horrible _Beast_, who appears to
be master here, is keeping him a prisoner. How can I set him free?...
They both warned me not to trust to appearances. It is all very
puzzling.... But one thing is clear at any rate, that I am very silly
to be vexing my head over a dream. I will forget all about it, and look
for something to do to amuse myself.'

She sprang up, and started to make a tour of discovery through the many
rooms of the palace. They were even grander than she had expected. The
first she entered was lined with mirrors from floor to ceiling, where
she saw herself reflected on every side. The next thing to catch her
eye was a bracelet, hanging from one of the chandeliers. Set in the
bracelet was a gold locket, and opening this she was startled indeed;
for it contained a portrait in miniature of the gallant youth she had
seen in her dream. She could not be mistaken; so closely were his
features engraved on her memory--yes, and, it may be, on her heart. She
slipped the bracelet on her wrist, without stopping to think that it
did not belong to her, and went on to explore further. She passed into
a long picture gallery, and there again she met the _Prince's_ face. It
smiled down at her, this time from a life-sized portrait, and it seemed
to smile so wistfully that she caught herself blushing.

From the gallery her steps had led her to a chamber filled with
instruments of music. _Beauty_ was an accomplished musician; so,
sitting down, she amused herself by tuning and trying over one
instrument after another; but she liked the harp best because that went
best with her voice.

Leaving the music-room at length, she found herself in a long chamber
like the picture gallery, but lined with books. It held an immense
library; and _Beauty_, ever since she had lived in the country, had
been forced to do without reading, for her father had sold all his
books to pay his debts. Now, as her eyes travelled along the shelves,
she knew she need never have any fear that time would pass heavily
here. The dusk was gathering before she had half-studied even the
titles of the thousands of volumes; and numbers of candles, waxen and
scented, in chandeliers with lustres of diamonds and rubies, were
beginning to light themselves in every room.

In due time _Beauty_ found supper laid and served for her, with the
same good taste and orderliness as before, and still she had seen no
living face. What did this matter? Her father had warned her that she
would be solitary; and she was beginning to tell herself that she could
be solitary here without much discomfort, when she heard the noise of
the _Beast_ approaching. She could not help trembling a little; for
she had not yet found herself alone with him, and knew not what would
happen--he might even be coming to devour her. But when he appeared he
did not seem at all ferocious.

'Good evening, _Beauty_,' he said gruffly.

'Good evening, _Beast_,' she answered gently, but shaking a little.

'Do you think you can be content here?' he asked.

_Beauty_ answered politely that it ought not to be hard to live happily
in such a beautiful palace.

After this they talked for an hour, and in the course of their talk
_Beauty_ began to excuse many things in the _Beast_--his voice, for
example. With such a nose how could he help roaring through it? Really,
he appeared to be wanting in tact rather than purposely terrible;
though, to be sure, this want of tact terrified her cruelly, when at
length he blurted out:--

'Will you be my wife, _Beauty_?'

'Ah! I am lost!' thought _Beauty_. The _Beast_ could not be so
dull-witted after all, for, though she kept the cry to herself, he
answered quickly, and just as if she had uttered it aloud:--

'Not at all. I wish you to answer just "yes" or "no."'

'Oh! no, _Beast_.'

'Very well, then,' said this tractable monster. 'Since you will not, I
had best be going. Good night, _Beauty_.'

'Good night, _Beast_,' answered _Beauty_, relieved of her fright. She
felt sure now that he did not mean to hurt her, and as soon as he had
taken his leave she went off to bed, and was asleep in no time.

But almost as quickly she was dreaming, and in her dream at once she
saw her unknown lover standing beside her, handsome as ever, but more
sorrowful than before.

'Dear _Beauty_,' he said, 'why are you so cruel to me? I love you the
better for being so stubborn, and yet it lengthens out my misery.'

She could not understand this at all. Her dream wavered and it seemed
to her that he took a hundred different shapes in it. Now he had a
crown between his hands and was offering it to her; now he was kneeling
at her feet; now he smiled, radiant with joy; and again he buried
his head in despair and wept till the sound of his sobbing pierced
her heart. Thus, in one aspect or another, he was with her the night
through. She awoke with him in her thoughts, and her first act was to
unclasp the locket on her wrist and assure herself that the miniature
was like him. It certainly was the same face, and his, too, was the
face that smiled down from the larger portrait in the gallery. But the
face in the locket gave her a more secret joy and she unclasped and
gazed on it again and again.

This morning she went down into the gardens, where the sun shone
inviting her to ramble. They were beyond imagination lovely. Here stood
a statue showered over with roses; there fountain on fountain played
and threw a refreshing spray so high in the air that her eyes could
scarcely reach to its summit. But what most surprised her was that
every nook and corner recalled those she had seen in her dreams with
the unknown _Prince_ standing beside her. At length she came to the
long canal with the oranges and myrtles in the shade of which she had
first seen him approach. It was the very spot, and she could no longer
disbelieve that her dreams were real. She felt sure, now, that he must
somehow be imprisoned here, and resolved to get at the truth that very
evening, should the _Beast_ repeat his visit.

Tired at length of wandering, she returned to the palace and
discovered a new room full of materials for work to engage the most
idle--tape-bags, distaffs and shuttles, frames for tapestry, ribbons to
make into bows, silks for embroidery, scissors, and thimbles. Beyond
this needlework room a door opened upon the most wonderful sight of
all--an aviary full of the rarest birds, yet all so tame that they flew
to _Beauty_, and perched themselves on her shoulders.

'Dear birds,' she said, 'I wish you were closer to my own room, that I
might sit and hear you singing.'

She had scarcely said it when, opening a door beyond the aviary, she
found herself in her own chamber--yes, her very own!--which she had
thought to be quite on the other side of the building. The door,
when she came to examine it, had a shutter which could be opened to
hear, and closed again when she grew tired of it. This aviary opened
on another inhabited by parrots, parroquets, and cockatoos. These no
sooner saw _Beauty_ than they began to scream and chatter; one wishing
her 'Good morning,' another inviting her to luncheon, while a third yet
more gallant cried 'Kiss me! Kiss me!' Others again whistled airs from
grand opera or declaimed pieces of poetry by the best authors. It was
plain that in their several ways they all had the same object--to amuse
her.

Beyond the aviaries lay a monkey house. Here were apes of all
sorts--Barbary apes, mandarin apes, apes with blue faces, baboons,
marmosets, chimpanzees--and all came frisking about her, bowing and
scraping, to show how much they appreciated the honour of this visit.
To celebrate it they stretched a tight-rope and danced, and threw
somersaults with an agility which _Beauty_ found highly diverting; and
yet she could not help sighing that none of these animals were able to
tell her news of her unknown _Prince Charming_. She patted and made
much of them, however, and asked if some of them would be kind enough
to come with her and keep her company.

At once, and as if they had only been waiting for this command, two
large she-apes in sweeping court-dresses stepped to her side and became
her maids of honour; two brisk little marmosets volunteered for pages
and held up her train; while an affable baboon, his face wreathed with
smiles, bowed, presented a gloved hand, and begged leave to squire her.
With this singular escort _Beauty_ marched back to luncheon, and while
she ate it the birds piped and fluted around her for accompaniment to
the parrots, who lifted up their voices and chanted the latest and most
fashionable tunes. Nay more; the meal was no sooner ended than the apes
begged her to allow them to entertain her with a light comedy; which
(leave being granted) they proceeded to act in a highly creditable
manner and with appropriate dumb-show, while the parrots spoke the
words from the wings very distinctly and in accents that exactly
conformed with the various parts. At the close one of the actors
advanced, laid his hand on his heart and--still with the parrot for
interpreter--thanked _Beauty_ for the indulgence she had shown to their
poor efforts.

That night again, after supper, the _Beast_ paid her his accustomed
visit. He put the same questions, and received her answers as before;
and, as before, the conversation ended by his taking leave of her with
a 'Good night, _Beauty_.' The two she-apes, as ladies-in-waiting,
thereupon undressed their mistress and saw her to bed. Before
leaving they thoughtfully opened the window-shutter, that the soft
night-warbling of the birds might soothe her to sleep and dream of her
lover.

In this fashion day followed day, and still _Beauty_ found plenty to
amuse her. At the end of a week she made the most wonderful discovery
of all. There was one large room which she had entered but once,
because it seemed to her rather dull, and dark too. It was empty; and
although it had four windows in each wall, but two of them admitted
any light. One day, as she passed the door, the fancy took her to open
one of these windows. She stepped in and drew the shutter, when to her
astonishment it opened, not upon daylight at all, but what seemed to be
a dim hall lit only by a glimmer, distant and faint, behind the chinks
of a thick curtain at the further end. She was wondering what this
might mean, when the curtain went up and in a sudden flood of light she
found herself gazing, as from a box, into a theatre crowded from floor
to ceiling, and with an audience brilliant in dresses and jewels.

An orchestra played the overture, and gave place to the actors--real
actors this time, not apes and parrots. The play was charming, and
_Beauty_ in ecstasy with every scene of it. When the curtain fell
she still lingered in her box, hoping to see the fashionable crowd
disperse; but somewhat to her chagrin the lights went out almost at
once and the theatre was dark again. Still it had been very pleasant,
and she promised herself to become a constant playgoer.

That evening when the _Beast_ paid his visit, she told him all about
the comedy. 'Eh? You like that sort of thing, do you?' asked the
monster. 'Well, you shall have as much of it as you like. You are
so pretty.' _Beauty_ could not help smiling inwardly at his clumsy
compliments. But she smiled no longer when he put to her once again his
blunt question:--

'_Beauty_, will you be my wife?'

'No, _Beast_,' she answered as before; but she was really beginning to
get frightened, he was so gentle and so persistent. She sat up so long
thinking over this that it was almost daylight before she closed her
eyes in bed; and at once, as if impatient at being kept waiting, the
lover of her dreams presented himself. Perhaps for this reason he was
not in the best of tempers; at any rate he taxed her with being moody
and discontented.

'I should be happy enough,' she answered, 'if the _Beast_ did not
pester me so. I--I almost think, by his foolish compliments, that he
would like me to marry him.' _Beauty_ expected her dream-lover to show
some jealousy at this; seeing that he merely stood glum, she went on,
'Would you really be content if I married him?... but alas! no; were he
as charming as he is hideous, you know that I love you and can never
love any one else.' By all rights the _Prince_ should have been in
raptures at this avowal; but all his answer was: 'Dearest, love him
who best loves you. Do not be led astray by appearances, and so you
will free me from captivity. 'This was not only puzzling; it seemed to
_Beauty_ to be just a little selfish. 'At least,' she said, 'tell me
what to do! Since liberty appears to be your first wish, believe me, I
would liberate you at any sacrifice, if only I knew how.' But this was
what she could never discover; and because of it her nights now, though
she longed for them, troubled her more than her days.

Her days passed pleasantly enough, and still in fresh discoveries. One
by one in their turn she opened the windows of the great hall, and they
revealed:--

First, a grand performance of Opera; and she listened not to the
singers only, but to the murmur of the audience between the acts. To
listen to this and to gaze on human faces, gave her an inexpressible
pleasure.

Next, a great Fair in progress. When first she looked the throng had
not arrived and she inspected the booths at leisure, with their various
wares. As the spectators drifted in, the drums began to beat, the hobby
horses to revolve, the showmen to shout, the marionettes to perform in
their little theatre. It was ravishing.

After this she beheld a fashionable promenade, with a richly dressed
crowd passing, re-passing, exchanging good-days, remarking how superb
was the weather, and pausing to con and criticise the shop windows to
right and left.

The next spectacle was a gaming-room, with the players seated at their
cards or roulette, the croupiers spinning the ball or raking the money.
_Beauty_, with nothing to stake, had leisure to observe their faces,
and how sadly some left the tables who had come smiling with money in
their pockets. She saw, too, that some were being cheated; and it vexed
her, because she could not warn them.

Next, she was gazing at the Royal Palace, where the King and Queen were
holding a reception. She saw ambassadors with their wives, lords and
ladies and state counsellors; and watched them as they passed by the
throne making their lowest bows.

A water picnic followed this. The boats lay moored alongside a bank
where the merry-makers sat or lounged and talked to the sound of lutes.

The picnic ended in a ball, with violins playing and couples advancing
and retreating on the waxed floor that shone in the light of a thousand
candles. Oh, how _Beauty_ longed to be one of the dancers!

But perhaps the last window gave her the most pleasure. For through
it she was able to see the whole world at one gaze and all that was
going on in it. State embassies, royal weddings, coronations, pageants,
armies, revolutions, sieges, pitched battles--she could sit at her ease
and watch them all, which was far more amusing than it is to read about
them in a newspaper.

She ought, you will say, to have been happy as the day was long.
But no: a life becomes flat and stale which is a perpetual round of
pleasure and leaves nothing to sigh or to hope for. _Beauty_ began
to long for a sight of her father and her brothers and sisters. She
concealed this for a while, however, and turned her thoughts to what
was more pressing; for she could not beg leave to go home until
something had been done to rescue her dear Unknown and restore him to
liberty. The _Beast_ alone (she reflected) could tell her the secret;
and she thought to herself that, being himself so blunt of speech,
he would forgive some bluntness in her. So one evening she asked him
point-blank: '_Beast_, are we alone in this palace, with nobody but
ourselves?'

'Of course we are,' he answered gruffly; but the question appeared in
some way to sting him, for almost at once he rose and bade her good
night.

Now _Beauty_, whatever else she thought of the _Beast_, had by this
time learnt to trust him for honest. It was a dreadful disappointment,
therefore, to be forced to believe on his word that her _Prince
Charming_ had no existence outside of her fancy. She slept ill that
night. In her dream she was wandering again and sorrowfully alongside
the canal when her lover appeared and took her hands between his while
he scanned her face all bathed in tears.

'What has gone wrong, dear _Beauty_?' he demanded. 'Why are you in this
distress?... Ah, it is the _Beast_ who persecutes you! But, never fear,
you shall be delivered here and now from his attention'--and with these
words the _Prince_ snatched out a dagger and rushed on the monster,
who now for the first time came into the dream, advancing slowly down
the bank of the canal. Strange to say, he offered no resistance even
when the dagger almost touched his throat. But _Beauty_, whom an unseen
power held back as she would have run to prevent the murder, on the
instant found voice to cry, 'Stay! Stay, rash fool! or kill me before
you kill him who has been my best friend!' 'Friend?' answered back
the _Prince_, still with his dagger lifted; 'and am I no more than
that?' 'You are an unfaithful one, at any rate,' persisted _Beauty_;
'if, knowing well that I would lay down my life for you, you would
take the life of one who has done me so much kindness. 'But while she
pleaded the figures wavered in her dream, still struggling together,
and vanished, giving place to the same stately lady she had seen in
her former vision. 'Courage, _Beauty_!' said this fresh phantom; 'your
happiness is not far off, if only you will go your own way and trust
not to appearances.'

This dream left _Beauty_ so uneasy that next day she opened one window
after another to cure her restlessness; and, when this would not do,
all the windows together; but still in vain. That night, when the Beast
paid his usual visit, he detected almost at once that she had been
weeping, and demanded the reason.

'Ah, sir,' said _Beauty_, 'if only I might go home!'

'You wish to go home? 'The _Beast's_ face turned pale--which, for such
a face, was no easy matter. He staggered backwards with a deep sigh,
or rather, a roar of grief. 'Ah, _Beauty_, _Beauty_! Would you desert
a poor _Beast_? What more can I do to make you happy? Or is it because
you hate me, that you wish to be gone?'

[Illustration: Ah! what a fright you have given me! she murmured.]

'No, _Beast_,' answered _Beauty_ gently; 'I do not hate you, and I
should be very sorry never to see you again. But I do long to see my
own people. Let me go home for two months only, and I promise to come
back and stay with you for the rest of my life.'

The _Beast_ had fallen flat and lay along the carpet at her feet. His
eyes were closed, and for some while his heavy sighs alone told her
that he was neither dead nor in a swoon. By and by he lifted his head:--

'I can deny you nothing,' he said sadly. 'But no matter, though it cost
me my life.... In the room next to your bedroom you will find four
chests: fill them with everything you would like to take with you. Be
sure to keep your word; for if you break it and come back to find your
poor _Beast_ dead, you will be sorry when it is too late. Come back
at the end of two months and you will find me alive; and to come back
you will not need chariot or horses. Only say good-bye, that night, to
your father, and brothers, and sisters; and, when you are in-bed, turn
this ring round on your finger and say firmly: "I wish to go back to my
palace and see my _Beast_ again." That is all. Good night, _Beauty!_
Sleep soundly, and in good time you shall see your father once more.'

As soon as he was gone _Beauty_ set to work to fill the four boxes with
all the riches and finery that heart could desire. She filled them to
the brim; and then, tired out, she went to bed. But for a long while
she could not close her eyes for excitement. It was not until close
upon sunrise that sleep visited her and, with it, another dream. In
this dream she saw her beloved Unknown stretched at full length on
a bank of turf. His face was hidden, and she could hear that he was
sobbing. But when, touched by the sight of his grief, she drew near to
console him, he lifted his face to her and said:--

'Cruel _Beauty_, how can you ask what ails me? when you are leaving me,
and your going is my death warrant!'

'But, dearest _Prince_,' said _Beauty_, 'I am only going to tell
my father and brothers and sisters that I am well and happy. In a
short while I shall be back, never to leave you again.... But, for
that matter,' she went on as a new thought struck her, 'why should
we be separated at all? I will put off my going for another day, and
to-morrow I will beg the _Beast_ to let you go with me. I am sure he
will not refuse.'

'I can only go with you, if you promise me never to come back,' replied
the _Prince_. 'And, after all, when you have once delivered me, why
should we ever come back? The _Beast_ will be hurt in his feelings and
very angry no doubt; but by that time we shall be beyond his power.'

'You forget,' _Beauty_ reminded him sharply, 'that I have promised him
to return, and that, moreover, he says he will die of grief if I break
my word.'

'And what if he does?' demanded her lover. 'Is not your happiness worth
more than the life of a monster? Of what use is he in the world except
to frighten folks out of their wits?'

'Ah, you do not understand!' cried _Beauty_. 'This monster--as you call
him--is only a monster in his face, and through no fault of his. He has
the kindest heart in the world, and how could I be so ungrateful after
all he has done for me!'

'I believe,' said her lover bitterly, 'that if you saw us fighting, of
the two you would rather let me perish than this _Beast_ of yours.'

_Beauty_ told him that he was cruel and unjust, and begged him to talk
of something else. She set the example, too. Seeing that he was piqued
and proud, she addressed a long speech to him, full of endearments, to
win him back to a good humour, and was growing astonished at her own
eloquence when, in the middle of it, she awoke.

Her last words seemed to mingle with the sound of familiar voices.
She sprang out of bed and drew her curtain.... It was very strange!
As the sunlight poured in she saw that she was in a room much more
poorly furnished than that in which she had fallen asleep. She dressed
in haste, and opening the door, found that the next room too was like
no apartment in the _Beast's_ palace. But at her feet stood the four
chests she had packed overnight; and, while she marvelled, again she
heard a voice talking, and ran towards it. For it was her father's.

She rushed out and fell into his arms. He, poor man, stared at her
as though she had sprung from another world, and the others were no
less astonished. Her brothers embraced her with transports of joy,
while her sisters--who, to tell the truth, had not overcome their
jealousy--pretended to be quite as glad. They plied her with a thousand
questions, which she answered very good-naturedly, putting aside her
own impatience; for she too had a number of questions to ask. To begin
with, this house of theirs was not the cottage in which she had left
them, but a fine new one her father had been able to buy with the
_Beast's_ presents. If not wealthy, he was in easy circumstances; with
the bettering of their fortunes his sisters had found other wooers and
were soon to be married; and altogether _Beauty_ had the satisfaction
of knowing that she had at least brought prosperity back to her family.
'As for you, my dearest child,' said the merchant, 'when your sisters
are married, you shall keep house for your brothers and me, and so my
old age will be happy.'

This was all very well, but _Beauty_ had to tell her father that she
must leave him again in two months' time; whereat he broke out into
lamentations. 'Dear father,' said the sensible girl, 'it is good of you
to weep; but it is useless, and I would rather have your advice, which
is sure to be useful.' Thereupon she told him all the story. Her father
considered for a while, and then said:--

'I can only give you the same counsel that, by your own admission, you
are always receiving from these phantoms of your dreams. "Do not trust
to appearance," they say, and "Be guided by your heart's gratitude";
and they tell you this over and over again. What can it mean, child,
but one thing? The _Beast_, you say, is frightful. His appearance is
certainly against him. Then judge him rather by the gratitude which you
certainly owe him. It is plain that he has a good heart--"handsome is
as handsome does"--it is clear to me that these phantoms would have you
say "Yes" to the _Beast_, and I too advise you to consent.'

_Beauty_ saw the wisdom of this and knew very well that her father
was counselling her for the best. Nevertheless it needed something
more than this to reconcile her with marrying a monster, and she
felt relieved at the thought that for two whole months she could put
off deciding. Strange to say, as the days went by and the time of
her departure drew nearer, she found herself looking forward to it
rather than repining. For one thing distressed her and spoilt all her
happiness--she never dreamed at all now.

The days went by, and as they drew to an end her brothers and even her
father (forgetting his former good counsel) employed all persuasions to
hinder her departure. But her mind was made up; and when the two months
were passed she was resolute on everything but the hour of her parting.
Every morning, when she got up, she meant to say good-bye, but somehow
another night came and the farewells were still unspoken.

She reproached herself (as well she might), and was still thus cruelly
torn between two minds, when one night a dream visited her--the first
for two months and more.

She dreamed that she was back at the _Beast's_ palace, and wandering
by a lonely path in the gardens which ended in a tangle of brushwood
overhanging a cave. As she drew nearer she heard a terrible groaning,
and running in haste she found the _Beast_ stretched there on the point
of death. Still in her dream she was bending over him when the stately
lady stepped forth from the bushes and addressed her in a tone of grave
reproach:--

'I doubt, _Beauty_, if even now you have come in time. Cruel, cruel of
you to delay! when your delay has brought him so near to death!'

Terrified by this dream _Beauty_ awoke in her bed with a start. 'I have
done wickedly!' she cried. 'Am I too late? Oh, indeed I hope not!' She
turned the ring upon her finger and said aloud in a firm voice: '_I
wish to go back to my palace and see my Beast again!_'

With that she at once fell asleep, and only woke up to hear the clock
chiming, '_Beauty, Beauty,_' twelve times on the musical note she so
well remembered. She was back, then, at the palace. Yes, and--oh,
joy!--her faithful apes and parrots were gathered around the bed,
wishing her good morning!

But none of them could tell her any news of the _Beast_. They were here
to serve her, and all their thoughts ended with their duty. Their good
master--the lord of this splendid palace--what was he to them? At any
rate nothing was to be learnt from them, and _Beauty_ was no sooner
dressed than she broke away impatiently, wandering through the house
and the gardens to fill up the time until evening should bring his
accustomed visit. But it was hard work filling up the time. She went
into the great hall and resolutely opened the windows one by one. The
shows were there as before; but opera and comedy, fête and pageant,
held no meaning for her: the players were listless, the music was null,
the processions passed before her eyes but had lost their power to
amuse.

Supper-time came at length; but when after supper the minutes passed
and passed and still no _Beast_ appeared, then indeed _Beauty_ was
frightened. For a long while she waited, listened, told herself this
and that, and finally in a terror rushed down into the gardens to
seek for him. The alleys were dark; the bushes daunted her with their
black shadows; but still up and down ran poor _Beauty_, calling to the
_Beast_, and calling in vain.

She was drenched with the dew, utterly lost and weary, when, after
three hours, pausing for a moment's rest, she saw before her the same
solitary path she had seen in her dream: and there in the moonlight she
almost stumbled over the _Beast_.

He lay there, stretched at full length and asleep--or so she thought.
So glad was she to have found him that she knelt and stroked his head,
calling him by name over and over. But his flesh was cold beneath her
hand, nor did he move or open his eyes.

'Ah, he is dead!' she cried, aghast.

But she put a hand over his heart, and to her inexpressible joy she
felt that it was still beating. Hastily she ran to a fountain near by,
and dipping water into her palms from its basin she ran and sprinkled
it on his face, coaxing him with tender words as his eyes opened, and
slowly--very slowly--he came to himself.

'Ah! what a fright you have given me!' she murmured. 'Dear _Beast_,
I never knew how I loved you until I feared that you were dead--yes,
dead, and through my fault! But I believe, if you had died, I should
have died too.'

'_Beauty_,' said the _Beast_ faintly, 'you are very good if indeed
you can love such an ugly brute as I am. It is true that I was dying
for you, and should have died if you had not come. I thought you had
forsaken me. But are you sure?'

'Sure of what?' asked _Beauty_.

'That you love me?'

'Let us go back to supper,' said _Beauty_, raising his head.

'Yes, let us go back to supper, 'agreed the _Beast_, lifting himself
heavily on her arm. He still leaned on her, as they walked back to the
palace together. But the supper--which they found laid for two--seemed
to revive him, and in his old stupid way he asked her about the time
she had spent at home, and if her father and brothers and sisters had
been glad to see her.

_Beauty_, though weary enough after her search through the park and
gardens, brisked herself up to tell of all that had happened to her in
her absence. The _Beast_ sat nodding his head and listening in his old
dull way--which somehow seemed to her the most comfortable way in the
world. At length he rose to go. But at the doorway he put the old blunt
question.

'_Beauty_, will you marry me?'

'Yes, dear _Beast_,' said _Beauty_; and as she said it a blaze of light
filled the room. A salvo of artillery sounded, a moment later, from
the park. Bang, bang! fireworks shot across the windows of the palace;
sky rockets and Roman candles exploded and a magnificent set-piece
wrote across the darkness in letters of fire--'LONG LIVE BEAUTY AND THE
BEAST!'

_Beauty_ turned to ask what all these rejoicings might mean; and, with
that, she gave a cry. The _Beast_ had vanished, and in his place stood
the beloved _Prince_ of her dreams! He smiled and stretched out his
hands to her. Scarcely knowing what she did, she was stretching hers,
to take them, when above the banging of fireworks in the avenues there
sounded a rolling of wheels. It drew to the porch, and presently there
entered the stately lady she had seen in her dreams. It was the very
same; and, all astounded as she was, _Beauty_ did reverence to her.

But the stately lady was as eager to do reverence to _Beauty_. 'Best
and dearest,' said she, 'my son is going to love you always; as how
should he not, seeing that by your courage you have rescued him from
the enchantment under which he has lain so long, and have restored him
to his natural form? But suffer also his mother, a Queen, to bless you!'

_Beauty_ turned again to her lover and saw that he, who had been a
_Beast_, was indeed the _Prince_ of her dreams and handsomer than the
day. So they were married and lived happy ever after; nay, so happy
were they that all over the world folks told one another and set down
in writing this wonderful history of _Beauty and the Beast_.


                 MORAL

     _Maidens, from this tale of_ Beauty
       _Learn, and in your memory write--_
     _Daily leads a Path of Duty_
       _Through the Garden of Delight;_
     _Where the loveliest roses wear_
       _Daunting thorns, for you to dare._

                ANOTHER

     _Many shy, unhappy creatures_
       _From the covert watch your mirth:_
     _'Foul are we,' they mourn; 'our features_
       _Blot the sun, deform the earth.'_
     _Pity, love them, speak them fair;_
       _Half their woe ye may repair._


