CINDERELLA OR THE LITTLE GLASS SLIPPER


Once upon a time there lived a gentleman who married twice. His second
wife was a widow with two grown-up daughters, both somewhat past their
prime, and this woman would have been the proudest and most overbearing
in the world had not her daughters exactly resembled her with their
fine airs and insolent tempers. The husband, too, had by his first wife
a child of his own, a young daughter, and so good and so gentle that
she promised to grow up into the living image of her dead mother, who
had been the most lovable of women.

The wedding festivities were no sooner over than the stepmother began
to show herself in her true colours. She could not endure the girl's
good qualities, which by contrast rendered her own daughters the more
odious. She put her to drudge at the meanest household work, and thus
she and her precious darlings not only wreaked their spite but saved
money to buy themselves dresses and finery. It was the child who
scoured the pots and pans, scrubbed the floors, washed down the stairs,
polished the tables, ironed the linen, darned the stockings, and made
the beds. She herself slept at the top of the house in a garret, upon a
wretched straw mattress, while her sisters had apartments of their own
with inlaid floors, beds carved and gilded in the latest fashion, and
mirrors in which they could see themselves from head to foot.

Yet they were so helpless, or rather they thought it so menial to do
anything for themselves, that had they but a ribbon to tie, or a bow
to adjust, or a bodice to be laced, the child must be sent for. When
she came it was odds that they met her with a storm of abuse, in this
fashion:--

'What do you mean, pray, by answering the bell in this state? Stand
before the glass and look at yourself! Look at your hands--faugh! How
can you suppose we should allow you to touch a ribbon, or even come
near us, with such hands? Run downstairs, slut, and put yourself under
the kitchen pump'--and so on.

'How can I help it?' thought the poor little drudge. 'If I do not
run at once when the bell rings, they scold me for that. Yet they
ring--both of them together sometimes--a minute after setting me to
rake out a grate and sift the ashes. As for looking at myself in the
glass, gladly would I do it if they allowed me one. But they have told
me that if I had a glass I should only waste time in front of it.'

She kept these thoughts to herself, however, and suffered her ill-usage
patiently, not daring to complain to her father, who would, moreover,
have joined with the others in chiding her, for he was wholly under his
wife's thumb; and she had enough of chiding already. When she had done
her work she used to creep away to the chimney-corner and seat herself
among the cinders, and from this the household name for her came to
be _Cinder-slut_; but the younger sister, who was not so ill-tempered
as the elder, called her _Cinderella_. They were wise in their way to
deprive her of a looking-glass; for in truth, and in spite of her sorry
rags, _Cinderella_ was a hundred times more beautiful than they with
all their magnificent dresses.


It happened that the King's son gave a ball, and sent invitations
through the kingdom to every person of quality. Our two misses were
invited among the rest, for they cut a great figure in that part of
the country. Mightily pleased they were to be sure with their cards of
invitation, all printed in gold and stamped with the broad red seal of
the Heir Apparent; and mightily busy they were, discussing what gowns
and head-dresses would best become them. This meant more worry for
_Cinderella_, for it was she who ironed her sisters' linen, goffered
their tucks and frills, pleated their wristbands, pressed their
trimmings of old lace and wrapped them away in tissue paper. A score of
times all this lace, piece by piece, had to be unwrapped, inspected,
put away again; and after a trying-on, all the linen had to be ironed,
goffered, crimped, or pleated afresh for them. They could talk of
nothing but their ball dresses.

[Illustration: She used to creep away to the chimney-corner and seat
herself among the cinders.]

'For my part,' said the elder, 'I shall wear a velvet cramoisie trimmed
_Ã  l'Anglaise_'--for she had a passion for cramoisie, and could not
perceive how ill the colour went with her complexion. 'I had thought of
cloth-of-gold, but there's the cost of the underskirt to be considered;
and underskirts seem to grow dearer and dearer in these days. What a
relief,' she went on, 'it must be to have money and not be forced to
set one thing against another!'

'I,' said the younger, 'must make shift with my old underskirt; that
is, unless I can wheedle some money out of Papa'--for so, in their
affection, they called their stepfather. '_Cinderella_ can take out the
worst stains to-morrow with a little eau-de-Cologne. I believe that,
if she tries, she can make it look as good as new; and, at all events,
it will give her something to do instead of wasting an afternoon. I
don't pretend that I _like_ wearing an old underskirt, and I hope
to make dear Papa sensible of this; but against it I shall have the
gold-flowered robe, on which I am determined, and my diamond stomacher,
which is somewhat better than the common.'

'And I, of course,' said the elder, 'must wear my diamond spray. If
only it had a ruby in the clasp instead of a sapphire! Rubies go so
much better with cramoisie.... I suppose there is no time now to ask
the jeweller to re-set it with a ruby.'

'But you don't possess a ruby, dear,' murmured her sister, who did
possess one, and had no intention of lending it. 'And, besides,
sapphires suit you so much better!'

They sent for the best milliner they could find, to build their
mob-caps in triple tiers; and for the best hairdresser to arrange
their hair; and their patches were supplied by the shop to which all
the Quality went. From time to time they called up _Cinderella_ to ask
her advice, for she had excellent taste. _Cinderella_ advised them
perfectly, and even offered her services to dress their hair for them
on the night of the ball. They accepted gladly enough.

Whilst she was dressing them one asked her: '_Cinderella_, would you
not like to be going to the ball?'

'Alas! miss,' said _Cinderella_, 'you are making fun of me. It is not
for the like of me to be there.'

'You are right, girl. Folks would laugh indeed to see _Cinder-slut_ at
a ball!'

Any one but _Cinderella_ would have pinned on their mob-caps awry; and
if you or I had been in her place, I won't swear but that we might have
pushed in the pins just a trifle carelessly. But she had no malice in
her nature; she attired them to perfection, though they found fault
with her all the while it was doing, and quite forgot to thank her
when it was done. Let it be related, in excuse for their tempers, that
they had passed almost two days without eating, so eager were they
and excited. The most of this time they had spent in front of their
mirrors, where they had broken more than a dozen laces in trying to
squeeze their waists and make them appear more slender. They were
dressed a full two hours before the time fixed for starting. But at
length the coach arrived at the door. They were tucked into it with a
hundred precautions, and _Cinderella_ followed it with her eyes as long
as she could; that is to say, until the tears rose and blinded them.

She turned away weeping, back to the house, and crept into her dear
chimney-corner; where, being all alone in the kitchen, she could
indulge her misery.

A long while she sat there. Suddenly, between two heavy sobs she looked
up, her eyes attracted by a strange blue glow on the far side of the
hearth: and there stood the queerest lady, who must have entered
somehow without knocking.

Her powdered hair was dressed all about her head in the prettiest
of short curls, amid which the most exquisite jewels--diamonds, and
rubies, and emeralds--sparkled against the firelight. Her dress had
wide panniers bulging over a skirt of lace flounces, billowy and
delicate as sea-foam, and a stiff bodice, shaped to the narrowest
waist imaginable. Jewels flashed all over this dress--or at least
_Cinderella_ supposed them to be jewels, though, on second thoughts,
they might be fireflies, butterflies, glowworms. They seemed at any
rate to be alive, and to dart from one point to another of her attire.
Lastly, this strange lady held in her right hand a short wand, on the
end of which trembled a pale bluish-green flame; and it was this which
had first caught _Cinderella's_ eye and caused her to look up.

'Good evening, child,' said the visitor in a sharp clear voice, at
the same time nodding kindly across the firelight. 'You seem to be in
trouble. What is the matter?'

'I wish,' sobbed _Cinderella_. 'I wish,' she began again, and again she
choked. This was all she could say for weeping.

'You wish, dear, that you could go to the ball; is it not so?'

'Ah, yes!' said _Cinderella_ with a sigh.

'Well, then,' said the visitor, 'be a good girl, dry your tears, and
I think it can be managed. I am your godmother, you must know, and in
younger days your mother and I were very dear friends.' She omitted,
perhaps purposely, to add that she was a Fairy; but _Cinderella_ was
soon to discover this too. 'Do you happen to have any pumpkins in the
garden?' her godmother asked.

_Cinderella_ thought this an odd question. She could not imagine what
pumpkins had to do with going to a ball. But she answered that there
were plenty in the garden--a whole bed of them in fact.

'Then let us go out and have a look at them.'

They went out into the dark garden to the pumpkin patch, and her
godmother pointed to the finest of all with her wand.

'Pick that one,' she commanded.

_Cinderella_ picked it, still wondering. Her godmother opened a fruit
knife that had a handle of mother-of-pearl. With this she scooped out
the inside of the fruit till only the rind was left; then she tapped
it with her wand, and at once the pumpkin was changed into a beautiful
coach all covered with gold.

'Next we must have horses,' said her godmother. 'The question is, Have
you such a thing as a mouse trap in the house?'

_Cinderella_ ran to look into her mouse trap, where she found six mice
all alive. Her godmother, following, told her to lift the door of the
trap a little way, and as the mice ran out one by one she gave each
a tap with her wand, and each mouse turned at once into a beautiful
horse--which made a fine team of six horses, of a lovely grey, dappled
with mouse colour.

Now the trouble was to find a coachman.

'I will go and see,' said _Cinderella_, who had dried her tears and was
beginning to find this great fun, 'if there isn't such a thing as a rat
in the rat trap. We can make a coachman of him.'

'You are right, dear,' said her godmother; 'run and look.'

_Cinderella_ fetched her the rat trap. There were three large rats in
it. The Fairy chose one of the three because of his enormous whiskers,
and at a touch he was changed into a fat coachman.

Next she said: 'Go to the end of the garden; and there in the corner of
the wall behind the watering-pot, unless I am mistaken, you will find
six lizards. Bring them to me.'

_Cinderella_ had no sooner brought them than her godmother changed them
into six footmen, who climbed up at once behind the coach with their
bedizened liveries, and clung on as though they had been doing nothing
else all their lives.

The Fairy then said to _Cinderella_: 'Hey now, child! This will do to
go to the ball with, unless you are hard to please.'

'Indeed, yes,' answered _Cinderella_. 'But how can I go, as I am, in
these horrid clothes?'

'You might have given me credit for thinking of that too!' Her
godmother did but touch her with her wand, and on the instant her rags
were transformed into cloth of gold and silver, all bespangled with
precious stones. She felt her hair creeping up into curls, and tiring
and arranging itself in tiers, on the topmost of which a double ostrich
feather grew from a diamond clasp that caught the rays of the old
lady's wand and shot them about the garden, this way and that, making
the slugs and snails crawl to shelter.

'But the chief mark of a lady,' said her godmother, eyeing her with
approval, 'is to be well shod,' and so saying she pulled out a pair of
glass slippers, into which _Cinderella_ poked her toes doubtfully, for
glass is not as a rule an accommodating material for slippers. You have
to be measured very carefully for it.

But these fitted to perfection: and thus arrayed from top to toe,
_Cinderella_ had nothing more to do but kiss her godmother, thank
her, and step into the coach, the six horses of which were pawing the
cabbage beds impatiently.

'Good-bye, child! 'said her godmother. 'But of one thing I must warn
you seriously. I have power to send you thus to the ball, but my power
lasts only until midnight. Not an instant beyond midnight must you stay
there. If you over-stay the stroke of twelve, your coach will become
but a pumpkin again, your horses will change back into mice, your
footmen into lizards, and your ball dress shrink to the same rags in
which I found you.'

_Cinderella_ promised that she would not fail to take her departure
before midnight: and, with that, the coachman cracked his whip and she
was driven away, beside herself with joy.


In the royal palace, and in the royal gardens, over which shone the
same stars which had looked down upon _Cinderella's_ pumpkins, the ball
was at its height: with scores and scores of couples dancing on the
waxed floor to the music of the violins; and under the trees, where the
music throbbed in faint echoes, other scores of couples moving, passing
and repassing, listening to the plash of the fountains and inhaling the
sweet scent of the flowers.

Now, as the King's son walked among his guests, word was brought to him
by his Chamberlain that a grand Princess, whom nobody knew, had just
arrived and desired admission.

'She will not tell her name,' said the Chamberlain; 'but that she is
a Princess and of very high dignity cannot be doubted. Apart from her
beauty and the perfection of her address (of which your Royal Highness,
perhaps, will allow me to be no mean judge), I may mention that the
very jewels in her hair are worth a whole province.'

The King's son hastened to the gate to receive the fair stranger,
handed her down from the coach, and led her through the gardens,
where the guests drew apart and gazed in wonder at her loveliness.
Still escorted by him she entered the ball-room, where at once a
great silence fell, the dancing was broken off, the violins ceased to
play--so taken, so ravished was everybody by the vision of this unknown
one. Everywhere ran the murmur, 'Ah! how beautiful she is!' The _King_
himself, old as he was, could not take his eyes off her, and confided
to the _Queen_ in a low voice that it was long since he had seen so
adorable a creature.

All the ladies were busily studying her head-dress and her ball gown,
that they might order the like next day for themselves, if only (vain
hope!) they could find materials so exquisite and dressmakers clever
enough.

The King's son took her to the place of honour, and afterwards led her
out to dance. She danced so gracefully that all admired her yet the
more. A splendid supper was served, but the young _Prince_ ate nothing
of it, so intent was he on gazing upon her.

She went and sat by her sisters, who bridled with pleasure at the
honour. She did them a thousand civilities, sharing with them the
nectarines and citrons which the _Prince_ brought her; and still not
recognising her, they marvelled at this, being quite unused (as they
never deserved) to be selected for attentions so flattering.

The King's son now claimed her for another dance. It had scarcely come
to an end when _Cinderella_ heard the clock strike the quarter to
twelve; whereupon she instantly desired her partner to lead her to the
_King_ and _Queen_. 'For I must be going,' she said.

'It is cruel of you to go so early,' he protested. 'But at least you
will come again to-morrow and grant me many dances?'

'Is there to be another ball, then, to-morrow?' she asked.

'To-morrow, yes; and as many morrows as you wish, if only you will
come.'

'Ah, if I could! 'sighed _Cinderella_ to herself: for she was young,
and it seemed to her that she could never have enough of such evenings
as this, though they went on for ever and ever.

The _Prince_ led her to the daÃ¯s where sat the _King_ and _Queen_. She
made a deep reverence before them, a slighter but no less gracious one
to the company, and withdrew. Although she had given no orders, her
coach stood waiting for her. Slipping in, she was whisked home in the
time it would take you to wink an eye.

She had scarcely entered the house, however, before she received a
shock. For on the threshold of the kitchen, glancing down to make sure
that her ball gown was not disarranged by this rapid journey, she
perceived that it had vanished--changed back to the rags of her daily
wear. But there, in the light of the hearth, stood her godmother, who
smiled so pleasantly that _Cinderella_ choked down her little cry of
disappointment.

[Illustration: Whereupon she instantly desired her partner to lead her
to the KING and QUEEN.]

'Well, child? And how have you fared?'

'Godmama, I have never been so happy in all my life! And it is all
thanks to you!' But after thanking her, _Cinderella_ could not help
confessing how she longed to go to the ball next evening. The King's
son had begged her to come again, and oh! if she had been able to
promise!

'As to that, child,' said her godmother, 'we will see about it when the
time comes. But it has been lonely, keeping watch and sitting up for
you. Will you not reward me by telling all about it?'

_Cinderella_ needed no such invitation; she was dying to relate
her adventures. She talked and talked, her godmother still smiling
and questioning. For two hours, may be, she talked and was still
recollecting a score of things to tell when her sisters' coach rumbled
up to the gate, and almost at once there came a loud ring at the bell.
She stared and rubbed her eyes, for at the first sound of it her
godmother had vanished!

_Cinderella_ ran and opened the door to her sisters. 'What a long time
you have stayed,' said she, yawning, rubbing her eyes, and stretching
herself as though she had just waked out of sleep. (She had felt,
however, no inclination at all to sleep since their departure!)

'If you had been at the ball,' said the elder sister, 'you would not
have felt tired. One of the guests was the loveliest Princess--oh, the
loveliest you ever could see! She showed us a thousand civilities. She
gave us nectarines and citrons.'

_Cinderella_ contained her joy. Upstairs, while she unplaited her
sisters' hair and unlaced their bodices, she asked the name of the
Princess. But they answered that no one knew her; that the King's son
was wild about her, and would give everything in the world to discover
who she was. _Cinderella_ smiled. She no longer felt any temptation at
all to be clumsy with the hairpins.

'Why then,' she said, 'she must be beautiful indeed. And she went away,
you say, without telling her name? Is no one going to see her again?'

'As for that, she may come again to the ball to-morrow. I am told that
the _Prince_ begged it, almost with tears in his eyes.... For there is
to be another ball to-morrow, and we are going!'

'Ah, heavens!' sighed _Cinderella_, how lucky you are! Might I not just
see her? Please, please, Sister Caroline, take me to-morrow--I could
manage quite well if only you lent me your yellow gown which you wear
every evening!'

'Hoity-toity! 'snapped _Miss Caroline_. 'You cannot be awake. You must
have been dreaming to some purpose if you see me lending my clothes to
a nasty little Cinder-slut!'

_Cinderella_ had quite well expected some such rebuff, and was glad
enough to get it, for it would have been very awkward if her sister had
been willing to lend the gown.


The next evening the two sisters were at the ball; and so was
_Cinderella_, but in even finer attire than before. Her godmother
had spared no pains, and as for the expense, that hardly needs to be
considered when you can turn pumpkins into gilt coaches, cobwebs into
Valenciennes lace, and beetles' wings into rubies, with the tap of a
wand.

The King's son in his impatience flew to her coach door as soon as she
arrived. Throughout the evening he never left her side, nor ceased to
make pretty speeches; and she, pretty maid, was far from finding his
behaviour tiresome--so far, indeed, that she forgot her godmother's
warning. The end was, that in the midst of a dance she heard the stroke
of a clock, looked up, was dismayed to find it the first stroke of
twelve when she believed it yet an hour short of midnight, and made her
escape as lightly as a deer. The _Prince_ followed, but could not catch
her. Only she dropped one of her glass slippers, which he picked up and
treasured.

With the last stroke of twelve, coach and footmen had whisked away,
and poor _Cinderella_, barefoot now as well as in rags, panted
homeward over roads where the flints cut her until she bled, and the
owls and great moths blundered out of the bushes against her face. To
make matters worse, a thunderstorm broke before she had ran half the
distance, and she arrived home in a terrible plight, muddy, drenched to
the skin, and almost more dead than alive. In one thing only she was
fortunate: she had outstripped her sisters, whose coach on the way home
lost a wheel--and I have a suspicion that _Cinderella's_ godmother had
something to do with this misadventure too.

At all events when _Cinderella_ opened the kitchen door the little lady
stood as she had stood the night before, in the glow of the hearth,
awaiting her.

'Well, child,' she said, frowning, yet the frown was not altogether
unkindly, 'it is easily seen that you have forgotten my warning and
have suffered for it. But what is _that_ you are clutching?'

Poor _Cinderella_ drew from under her bedraggled bodice a crystal
slipper, fellow to the missing one. It was the one remnant of all her
finery, and somehow, scarcely knowing why, she had hugged it to her
while she ran and never let it slip in all her stumblings.

Her godmother gazed at her with a queer expression, that began by being
a frown, yet in the end had certainly changed into a shrewd smile.

'You have been careless,' she said. 'Yet I am pleased to see that you
have managed to keep, at any rate, one-half of your godmother's gift.
'I think she meant by this that whereas all the rest of _Cinderella's_
adornment had been contrived out of something other than it was, the
two glass slippers had been really produced out of the Fairy's pocket.
They alone had not vanished at the stroke of midnight. 'But what has
become of the other one?' her godmother asked.

_Cinderella_ did not know for certain, but fancied that she must have
dropped it in her hurry to escape from the palace.

'Yes, you are careless,' repeated the Fairy; 'but decidedly you are not
unlucky.'

And with that she vanished, as the bell sounded announcing the
sisters'return.

They were not in the best of humours, to begin with. _Cinderella_ asked
them if they had again found the ball enjoyable, and if the beautiful
lady had been there. They told her yes; but that on the stroke of
twelve she had taken flight, and so hurriedly that she had let fall
one of her small glass slippers, the prettiest in the world, which the
King's son had picked up. They added, that this indeed was the first
cause of their delay; for, seeking their carriage, they had found the
entry blocked, and the _Prince_ in the wildest state of mind, demanding
of the guards if they had not seen a Princess pass out. The guards
answered that they had seen no one pass out but a ragged girl, who
looked more like a country wench than a Princess. Amid this to-do, the
sisters had with difficulty found their coach; and then, within two
miles of home, a wheel had come off and the coach had lurched over, in
a thunderstorm, too; and they had been forced to walk the rest of the
way, the one with a bruised shoulder, and the other (which was worse)
with a twisted ankle. But, after all, the dance had been worth these
mischances and sufferings; and, said they, harking back, the _Prince_
was undoubtedly deep in love, for they had left him gazing fondly at
the slipper, and little doubt--mysteriously as she chose to behave--he
would make every effort to find the beautiful creature to whom it
belonged.


They told the truth, too. For a few days after, the King's son had it
proclaimed by sound of trumpet that he would marry her whose foot the
slipper exactly fitted.

At first they tried it on the Princesses of the Court:

Then on the Duchesses:

Then on the Marchionesses:

Then on the Countesses and Viscountesses:

Then on the Baronesses:

And so on, through all the ladies of the Court, and a number of
competitors, who, though they did not belong to it, yet supposed that
the smallness of their feet was an argument that their parents had very
unjustly come down in the world. The Prime Minister, who carried the
glass slipper on a velvet cushion, was kept very busy during the next
few weeks.

At length he called on _Cinderella's_ two sisters, who did all they
could to squeeze a foot into the slipper, but by no means could they
succeed.

_Cinderella_, who was looking on and admiring their efforts, said
laughingly:--

'Let me see if it will fit me.'

Her sisters began to laugh and mock at her, but the Prime Minister,
who had come to make trial of the slipper, looked at _Cinderella_
attentively, and seeing how good-looking she was, said that it was but
just--he had orders to try it upon every one.

[Illustration: The Prime Minister was kept very busy during the next
few weeks.]

He asked _Cinderella_ to sit down, and drawing the slipper upon her
little foot, he saw that it went on easily, and fitted the foot like
wax. Great was the astonishment of the two sisters; but it was greater
when _Cinderella_ pulled from her pocket the other little slipper and
put it upon the other foot. On top of this came a rap at the door,
and in walked the Fairy Godmother, who, by a touch of her wand upon
_Cinderella's_ clothes, made them still more magnificent than they had
been before.

And now her two sisters knew _Cinderella_ to be the same beautiful
creature they had seen at the ball. They threw themselves at her feet,
begging her pardon for all the ill-usage they had made her suffer.
_Cinderella_ raised and kissed them, saying that she forgave them with
all her heart, and entreated them to be loving to her always.

They led her to the young _Prince_, arrayed as she was. He thought
her lovelier than ever, and, a few days after, they were married.
_Cinderella_, who was as good as she was beautiful, lodged her two
sisters in the palace, and married them that same day to two great
Lords of the Court.


                MORAL

     _Better than wealth or art,_
        _Jewels or a painted face,_
     _It is when a natural heart_
        _Inhabits its natural place_
        _And beats at a natural pace._

               ANOTHER

     _Yet youth that is poor of purse,_
        _No matter how witty or handsome,_
     _Will find its talents no worse_
        _For a godmamma to advance 'em._

